>> Welcome to Refactoring in Xcode.
My name is Andrew Pontious.
The agenda for today consists of three parts.
First, what is refactoring and why would you want to do it?
Second, we'll go through the refactoring
transformations in Xcode.
The workflow, to do them.
And third, we will give you some hints on
how to make the best use on refactoring
and give you some things to consider when using it.
For those of you were in this session last year, some of
this will be review and some of this will be entirely new.
But before we get to that agenda, some of you may
be thinking project wide automatic code changes,
I can do that already with project find and replace.
So I'm going to give you an example that
those goes beyond project find and replace.
Let's say you inherited a project from a co-worker,
but that co-worker, a little bit of a bird brain.
When he was coming up with names for all of the
parts of his program, all he could think of was:
( Plays audio clip from Disney's Finding Nemo.
Seagulls repeating mine, mine, mine )
He had a class named Mine, a protocol
named Mine, a structure named Mine,
a function named Mine, a method named Mine.
You get the picture.
So, what we'd like to do is change
the class named Mine to its real name.
And we'll show that to you right now.
Can we switch to the demo machine?
Are we all set, oh ok thank you.
On our demo machine this morning, Yugi Yakomoto.
Ah great.
( applause )
>> Return engagement from last year.
Okay, so we bring up the project find window and
we type in the word mine, click the find button.
And you can see there are quite a few results there.
So if we go to look at some of these results for example
the ClassMineFunction.m file, quite a few results.
We can see that interspersed among the usages of the class
named mine there are also uses of the method named mine,
even a string named mine, all sorts of things.
So if you wanted to replace just the class names,
you'd have to pick out exactly which results you wanted
and then click the replace button, do a build and make
sure you had selected everything that you needed to select
that you didn't select things you
weren't supposed to select.
It'd be really messy, really tedious
thing to do, it would be a minefield.
( laughter )
( applause )
>> Not my joke.
Okay, so if instead we go to the Mine.h file
and select the class name mine, the string,
and bring up the refactoring window and we type in
the new name we want in this case drawing engine,
click the rename related files check
box and click the preview button.
Pretty quick, huh?
So if we look at the results here you can see
that for that same file that we were looking
at before what refactoring has done for you is picked
out exactly the ones you wanted to change for you.
It's left the methods, it's left the string.
Now if we look a little further we can see to the next file
of Mine.h. We're actually renaming
Mine.h and Mine.m to the new names.
Now very common custom in Cocoa programming, when you name a file the
same name as the class, you want those to stay in sync.
And refactoring does that for you and in fact it even
changes import statements that refer to those files.
Great. We can click the apply button and that will
make the changes in the files in your project.
But you see there's even more to it than that.
Save this file here.
If you go back to the project window
you can see that in fact this project is
under a source control management system.
And you can see with the ClassMineFunction.m there's
an m next to it, it's a little cut off because the font is
so big, but that's telling us that we made those changes
and the source control management system recognizes that.
But next to the new class names,
there's an a. And what does that mean?
That means that what refactoring has done is it's noticed
that you're using a source control management system
and instead of just changing the files on disk it's
also changed them in your local repository for you.
So all you would need to do to upload these
changes is do one commit and you're done.
Pretty cool, huh?
( applause )
>> Okay. So we can switch back to the slide machine.
Now that I've given you a taste of what
refractory can do for you I will bring
up Robert Bowdidge to get started with our agenda.
Thanks.
>> Thank you Andrew.
Okay. So Andrew's given you an example
of what refactoring looks like.
What I would like to do is tell you what refactoring
is and why you want to use it on your own projects.
So if I was asked to define what refactoring is, this
is what I'd say: Refactoring is a way to make global,
structural, controlled changes to a program.
The changes are global because
they affect all your source code.
When you go and you say I want to rename this
declaration, it's changed in all the places it appears.
The changes are structural because they're
affecting the design of your program.
They're affecting what abstractions exist, what
they're called, how they relate to each other.
And the changes are controlled they're not just
a set of edits, but they're actually trying
to maintain certain properties about the code.
Refactoring tries to make sure your code
still compiles the same before as after.
And that it has the same running behavior before as after.
Now why would you want to use refactoring and there's two
good reasons to use it: the first one is it allows you
to make your code more maintainable and more understandable.
For example, let's imagine that we're
writing a program to run a car rental agency.
And one of the classes we're liable to have in
that application is something called CarRental
which has all the information about
a specific rental experience.
And this is a fine name, I would've done
this if I had written the program myself.
However let's imagine that you decide to change
the program and you decide to start allowing
that you can rent trucks as well as cars.
And the problem is now this name is inappropriate.
That whenever you or anybody else on
the team looks at the code they're going
to say okay was this just on the
cars or is this for everything.
And so what you'd like to be able to do is
change that name with a rename refactoring
so that the name is something more generic like rental
record so you know that this is nor just car specific
but it's for all the vehicles you're renting.
Now the second reason you can use refactoring is
it makes it easier to apply certain enhancements.
So for example, there's the case of partitioning a class
so in the car rental example you'll
probably have a class called car
that has all the information about
one of the cars being rented.
And that car as you can see on the left hand
side has some information that's probably generic
like what the odometer reading is, when the car
was last serviced and then that class is also going
to have methods that are more specific about cars.
How many seats does it have, does it
have a radio, does it have a roof rack.
And this is a perfectly fine way to structure the program.
However let's imagine that you
decide to start renting trucks now.
And the problem is that you'd like to be able to reuse
some of that code in the car class, the generic stuff.
And so you can use refactoring to break that class into two
pieces so you now have a generic vehicle class like you see
on the right that has all the generic
behavior and the subclass of that
which is the car class that has all the car behavior.
And once you've done this, it's easy to make the truck class
that inherits off a vehicle and
you get all that code for free.
Another example of how refactoring can help
enhance code is the idea of encapsulation.
So let's imagine that you have a class called CarRental
which represents the information about the rentals,
and that class probably has an
instance variable called dailyRate
which represents the cost to rent that car for a day.
And that variable is probably accessed
in a lot of places in your code.
There's probably places where you're
changing the value based
on what the discount rate is for
the person who's renting the car.
There might be something that accesses
the daily rate to print out the receipt.
And those are just going to access it directly
That seems like a fine way to write the program.
However what happens when you decide that, that daily
rate shouldn't be just a variable set in the class
but it should be accessing a database
so that the rates are consistent.
And if you want to make that change now you have to go
to every place where daily rate's referenced and you have
to figure out okay how does this
relate to the database example.
You know how do I need to change my code
so that it will work with the database.
And the problem is that's going to be a lot of work, you
have to go to a bunch of places, it's easy to make mistakes
and what you'd prefer to do is be able to
convert the code to what you see on the right.
Where you encapsulate all the references to daily
rate so that their hidden behind a getter and setter.
And once you've done that and all the
various code that was accessing it now goes
through these functions all you have
to do is change those two functions.
And now you can do whatever behavior you
need to change how daily rate's represented.
Now we as programmers do this kind of stuff already,
we already do renames, we already do refactoring,
but the problem is that it's an
error prone and tedious activity.
And so every time that I do this sort of thing,
I have to ask myself am I introducing
subtle bugs into my code by doing this?
And if you want to do refactoring correctly you need
to follow some steps kind of like what we have here.
So first of all you need to compile
your code and run your unit test
to make sure the program behaves the way you think it does.
Then you have to test some preconditions
for that transformation.
So for example, in the case of rename
you need to make sure that every place
where the declaration is used doesn't have
something already defined with the name
of the new name where you have conflicts.
Or in the case of encapsulation you'd have to look at
every place in the code and decide whether the variable
that you're encapsulating can be changed
into either a getter or setter call.
Once you've decided that the transformation is safe, now
you actually need to go through the code from top to bottom
and at every single place that you need to change you need
to make exactly the right change in exactly the right place.
And if you mess up you introduce subtle bugs into your code.
And then once you're done now you need to
recompile the code to make sure it still compiles.
And you need to run your unit test to
make sure that it still behaves the same
But why do we have to do that?
We have tools that already understand our source code we
have compilers, we have code completion in our editors.
Why can't I as the programmer decide
what my design should look like so
that I can tell my tools hey this is how I need this to be?
And the tools can do all the nasty,
dirty work to actually make that true,
can make the changes, can prove the changes are safe.
And tools like this exist for other
platforms and for other languages.
But in general they haven't been
available for Objective-C programmers.
And so the key issue in this session is that
Xcode 3.0 now has refactoring support.
And more than just support it's been optimized
for Apple's languages and Apple's environment.
So Xcode 3.0 will allow you to change
C and Objective-C source files in your projects,
the transformations understand the new
Objective-C 2.0 language features
and in fact there's some transformations
specific to Objective-C 2.0.
Xcode also understands that your source
code isn't just your source files.
That there's other things that
affect the behavior of your code.
For example, there's nib files
which describe the user interface.
And there's core data files which describe
how it interacts with the database.
And then you have key-value coding so that you
can access fields of a class by name, by string.
And most importantly we realize that your
programs aren't just little small examples.
You have real programs of hundreds of thousands of lines
and so we've worked hard to make sure that this will work
on hundreds of thousands of lines of code on large projects.
Now there's five kinds of refactoring
transformations that Xcode 3.0 supports.
And the operations are called transformations because
they have the mathematical sense of converting something
from one form to another in a very controlled way.
The first kind of transformation is rename
as you saw, that Andrew demonstrated.
And the rename transformation will allow you
to rename classes and functions and methods
and categories and protocols and everything.
The second kind of transformation that
we have is an extract transformation.
This allows you to select a block of code in your
program and say I need this to be a new function.
And Xcode will automatically make the new function, put
in the function call, choose what the parameters need to be
and this gives you a way to make your code more
understandable by breaking up large functions
or it allows you to break code off into a new method so
that you can actually reuse the behavior or change it.
The third kind of transformation that Xcode
supports manipulates the class hierarchy.
These are transformations for creating
an abstract superclass.
For moving instance variables up and down on the hierarchy.
The fourth class are the encapsulate transformations.
These allow you to wrap either a field
of a structure or an instance variable
in the class behind getter and setter methods.
And finally there's transformation specific
to Objective-C 2.0 that allow you
to automatically convert iterators of our
NS arrays and NS sets into the new for in notation
with Objective-C 2.0 that's
both faster and easier to understand.
And there's also a transformation that will convert
instance variables in your code into properties
so you can see what properties look like.
Now to actually demonstrate these I'd like to bring Andrew
Pontious back on stage to show you the features in Xcode.
( applause )
>> Thank you.
Thank you Robert.
So I'm going to walk you through these transformations.
For some of them I will be doing a demonstration for you,
for some of them due to time considerations I will just
be showing you some slides about them, some use cases.
So we'll start with rename.
Now to demonstrate rename for you and all of the other
transformations that we'll be demonstrating for you today,
we're going to use a program called Bricksmith.
Bricksmith is a real world, open
source, Cocoa based application.
And what Bricksmith does for you is it lets you model
creations made out of Lego bricks, so you can both see them
and you can make little instructions
for other people to use them as well.
Now one of the things that happens with open source
projects is that you can get contributions from anywhere.
You can get them from all over the
world, from people that you don't know.
So sometimes these contributions might be in
the wrong format for the existing program.
So we're going to look at a case
where we need to change that.
Can we switch to the demo machine?
So as you can see Yugi is playing around a
little bit with the Bricksmith user interface.
There's a pretty neat spaceship there, spaceship creation,
and he's putting a mini figure inside of the cockpit.
So pretty cool stuff.
So now if we go back to the Bricksmith project, and we look
through the files in it, you can see that many of the files
in this project start with the prefix LDraw.
So the files are of the form LDraw plus something.
But there's one file, there's one set of files in
the list where the pattern is LDrawn plus something.
And you can see that, that's for
the class called LDrawnPart.
So if we open up, save the header file, we're going to
rename this file so that it matches all of the others.
So we can bring up the refactoring window, there
are several ways to bring up the refactoring window,
you can use the main menu bar, edit menu which has a
refactor menu item, you can use the contextual menu
for the text selection that you've made,
and you can also use a tool bar item
that you can add to your Xcode window toolbar.
Now when you've selected something which
represents something that can be refactored,
the tool bar item, the menu item will all be enabled.
If you select something which cannot
be refactored, for example blank space
or comment, those items will be disabled.
So let's bring up the refactoring window.
And we'll rename that class to LDrawPart and do the same
thing we did the first time which is rename related files.
Preview that.
So as you can see as the preview's going on there,
you can see activity going on in the window.
You can see what it's analyzing.
Now if we look at the result in here, save the first file,
you can see that we've changed the
usage of the LDrawnPart class.
If we go down to the next file, you can see
as before we've changed an import statement.
But the most interesting thing about this
demonstration occurs a little down further
in the results area we are also changing instead of
just text files we're changing a nib file as well.
So let's go to that.
So you can see that the view that you see for nib files is
a little different than the view you see for text files.
For the nib file what refactoring does is it shows you the
pieces, the parts of a nib that refactoring can change.
These are broken up into categories, the first category
is the classes category because you can rename classes,
if you go down a little further, you can see that
the second category is for object controllers.
Object controllers refer to classes and you can see
that for each one of the object controllers here,
it has the name of the class that it refers to in bold
and there are eight of these in particular nib file
and they all refer to the LDrawnPart class.
So what refactoring does for you is it
changes that reference to LDrawPart.
That'll work so we can apply those changes.
And we can switch back to the slide machine.
Okay. Now that I've shown you a little
more about the rename transformation I'd
like to walk you though the contents
of the refactoring window.
The refactoring window is made up of three areas.
From top to bottom they are, the set up area,
the results area and the comparison area.
The first area you will see when you
bring up the refactoring window is the set
up area, all the other areas start out blank.
The set up area is where you set up your transformation.
Type in what needs to be typed in, check
whatever check boxes need to be checked.
Now another thing you'll see in the set up area, you can
see right now, is there's a checkbox called snapshot.
And that's actually using the snapshot feature that's
new in Xcode 3.0 that was described
in the Xcode 3.0 the new
development workflow yesterday in this room.
And we'll talk a little bit more about that in a minute.
Now if you don't want to do rename if you want
to use a different transformation what you do is
you bring up the transformation pop up button.
Now for this particular example, this
selection has no other relevant transformations.
But we'll see later on in many cases, there will
be several available for you for your selection.
Now when you click the preview button as you saw,
the next area comes up, this is the results area.
And when the preview's going on the file that is currently
being analyzed will have a little progress spinner next
to it.
Files that have not yet been analyzed
will be in a lighter grey color.
Now when the preview is done, most of
the files will show checkboxes next
to them which means changes from the preview.
Another thing you may see and we will
see in many of our examples today,
is a new category called the errors and warnings category.
Now why does refactoring show you this category?
When refactoring is doing a transformation and it finds
something which it needs some help with where it knows
or it suspects that it can't complete the
transformation, it will give you that information.
For warnings it's when it isn't quite sure what to do.
For example you're renaming something which is of type id
and so it can't perform the same kind of class inspection,
class analysis that it normally would because
that's something that will only be known at runtime.
For errors it's something where refactoring
knows that something's going wrong.
And it may be something that you can fix, it may
be something that you just have to take note of
but this transformation as it is, it knows will not succeed.
And we'll see some examples of that too.
Now if you select one of the files in the results area,
the third area comes up and that is the comparison area.
The comparison area should remind you of another
application that comes with the Xcode tools
that you've probably all used, file merge.
Like file merge there are two subviews that shows two
different states of a file, like file merge there's a strip
in the middle which has arrows to show the direction of
the changes whether the changes are being made or not.
But there's several things where
it is unlike file merge as well.
In file merge when you flip an arrow around so a change
will not be made, there's a merge view at the bottom
that shows you the results of your choices.
But in the refactoring window the
right hand view is the merge view.
So you can see when we flip the arrow so a change
isn't being made that shows up on the right hand side.
Another difference is that the results area
and the comparison area are kept synchronized.
So in this case above what we've done is we've turned
off one change but two changes are still being made.
So the checkbox changes to a mix state.
If we flipped all the arrow around so that no
changes are being made the checkbox would become unchecked
and if you flip them all around
again then it would become checked.
Now this doesn't need to be driven from the arrow side
you can also check and uncheck the checkbox yourself
and that will flip the arrows around
so everything is kept in sync.
And the last way that the comparison view is
different is that you can actually put your cursor
in the right hand side of this area and start typing.
As you can see we've typed a one at the end of the parameter
name and what happens when you do this during a refactoring,
is the icon for the file changes to a dirty state.
So now that I've shown you that we can
go on to the extract transformation.
Let me switch back to the demo machine.
Okay so to show you extract we're
going to use some functionality
from Bricksmith that has to do with the mini figure.
A cute little figure you can get in Lego bricks there.
So as you can see the mini figure has a lot
of different options that can be set for it.
It can have a different hat, different
hair, different face, different arms
and legs, different clothing, all sorts of things.
So as you can imagine the method that brings all
that together is pretty long and pretty complicated.
So it switched back to that, that's the mini figure
dialog controller classes method generate mini figure.
Bring that up.
And as we scroll down through that
you can see it's a pretty long method.
Now the trouble with long methods like this is that
they're hard to maintain and they're hard to augment.
Because whenever you change something inside of that
method, you have to make sure that you're not messing
up functionality that exists anywhere
above and below what you're changing.
So what you'd like to do is split this up into
discreet self contained identifiable chunks of logic
and you can do that through the extract transformation.
So let's start pretty much right at the top and
we'll select a piece of code and we'll bring
up the refactoring window and we'll see what happens.
As you can see for the extract transformation unlike
the other transformations that bit of analysis has
to happen before it can even show you its
initial set up, user interface and options.
As you can see what happens when that analysis
is done is refactoring shows you the signature
of the method that it is going to extract.
So let's preview that.
Have a look.
Ooh. Yeah that's s a pretty long method signature isn't it?
So what's going on here is refactoring has done all
that analysis work that I told you about for you.
What it's found is that all 15 of those
local variables that we selected are being created
in that chunk of code are all needed later on.
So what refactoring does is it creates out parameters for
those local variables If they were variables that needed
to come in to the chunk of code
they would become input parameters.
So what refactoring is actually telling
us here is this particular chunk
of code is not a good candidate for our goal.
It's not to be self contained.
So let's try again.
We can cancel out of this and select
some code a little farther down.
The head pieces section.
We bring up the refactoring window again,
a little bit more analysis going on.
Now when we see the method for this
piece of code it's much more reasonable.
Why don't you preview that here.
Bring that up.
You can see that for this method there are only three
input parameters, the head, hat and neck pieces.
So that makes some more sense to extract that out.
But before we go ahead and apply that let's have a look
at the other option that's available to you in extract
which is instead of extracting a
method, you can extract a function.
Now why would you want to do that?
The thing about functions is they are
even more self contained than classes.
So preview this.
And what we see here is when we attempt to extract a
function from the same code there are more parameters.
What's going on?
What's going on is there's two methods that
we saw before the new one and the old one.
We're actually communicating, had context
going back and forth that was hidden
because it was the instance variables of the class.
So what we see here is some of those instance variables are
actually needed by the functionality in the new method,
new function, so that means that this is not
a good candidate for making a function out of.
What you want to do for functions is make functionality
that can be used by more than one class that's very generic.
So refactoring can do both those
things for you as appropriate.
For now we'll switch back to extracting a method
and we'll call this method generate head pieces.
And we can preview that again and apply it.
And we're all done.
Switch back to the slide machine.
So the third set of transformations I'm going
to show you have to do with class hierarchy.
Create superclass move up, move down.
Now to show you these transformations,
I have to ask a simple question.
What's better than this?
Modeling Lego bricks.
How about modeling Lincoln Logs?
You guys know what Lincoln Logs are right?
Okay well, look it up.
So but what you actually want to do is you
don't just want to model one or the other.
You want to do both, you want to use the existing modeling
infrastructure from Bricksmith and have it be able
to do the same sorts of things,
the same generic things for both.
So let's try that out.
Switch back to the demo machine.
Okay. So we'll go to the LDrawDocument class.
Now just by it's name you can tell that it's actually
fairly intimately tied with the Lego bricks implementation.
Actually, LDraw is an open standard for Lego modeling programs.
But there is still some functionality in this
class that can be used for a generic modeling.
So what we're going to do is we're going to create a superclass
of this specific class and then move stuff up to it.
So we select the class name, bring
up the refactoring window again.
And this time we're going to switch from the rename
transformation to the create superclass transformation.
We'll type in a new name, the name will be modeling document
since this is a generic modeling
class and we can preview that now.
Interesting thing going on here, we see
our first warnings in a demonstration.
And the warnings say import statement
may need to be changed.
So let's look at the second warning.
Now what you can see here, this particular import
statement that refactoring has created for you,
what refactoring does is it takes the immediate
header file for a particular class and puts it
in an import statement using quote notation.
So straight, simple logic for you that's
available in Xcode 3.0.
But we know in this particular case that NS document
is part of the umbrella framework, Cocoa framework.
So what you really want to do here is
use the Cocoa framework umbrella header.
So what you're just going to do here is type
in that umbrella header import statement.
So we're using that capability of doing manual edits.
Other than that, we're in good shape.
So what you can see here is the first case of you
working with refactoring, you intervening as necessary
to complete a transformation that refactoring began for you.
Refactoring did all the work that it could, you do the rest
and you can apply the changes and
know that everything will work.
So you can go ahead and apply those changes.
Okay so now we've created our superclass.
Let's move some stuff up to it.
Go back to the LDrawDocument class and if you look
at the very first instance variable there it's
the tool bar controller instance variable.
Now both the Lego document window and the brick I should
mean and the log modeling window will need a tool bar.
So this is something that's generic
enough to be moved up to the superclass.
So we select the instance variable, we bring up the
refactoring window again and we switch to move up
and we're going to check the move up related
methods check box as well and preview that.
Now there's no need for any other options for
what class to move your instance variable up to
because in Objective-C a single
inheritance so there's only one superclass.
As you can see in the errors and warnings section we're
letting you know that we're also moving up a method.
So let's have a look at LDrawDocument.h.
And you can see that in this existing subclass,
we've removed the instance variable if we scroll down
you can see we've also removed the method declaration.
And if we look at the new class you can see that we've moved
in that instance variable and the method declaration to it.
Okay? We can apply those changes.
And alright.
So we can switch back tot the slide machine.
Okay so for move down I'm not going to show you a
demonstration I'm just going to show you an example of it.
So here we have the refactoring
window for a move down transformation.
And as you can see for a move down because you can have
several subclasses we show all of them and that you choose
which ones you want you can choose one or some
or all, in this case we've chosen all of them.
And you can see from the comparison view what's
happened is for the subclass LDrawPart,
we've moved down the instance variable is subclass to it.
Okay? So moving on to the encapsulate transformation.
For encapsulate we will also not
be showing you a demo today.
But here's an example.
So for that example we're going to go back to that mini
figure dialog controller class that we looked at already
and you can see in this class there
are these 13 instance variables
which all are Boolean, which all
start with has, has something.
That's a little bit of repetition and maybe a little bit
of wasted space that you might want to do something about.
So what you could do is you could put these
instance variables as the bit fields in a structure
or you could put them into a core data entity
so that would take care of all the storage
and all you'd have to do is refer to them by keyword.
But in any case in order to do
any of that you need to be able
to separate the back end implementation from all the colors.
So you can start doing that by encapsulating
the very first instance variable.
And we can see how this works right here.
So here what's happened is,
what refactoring has found out is
that there's already a setter method
of the name that we chose that's being used here.
Now if we look at the results what refactoring has done is
it's said oh here's a place where we're setting the variable
to a value so we're going to replace that with the
setHasHat method but in fact it's actually inside
of the already existing setHasHat method.
So that's no good.
So you can go ahead and flip the arrow around to undo that
particular change or you can use manual editing to fix it.
Either way once you fix those particular
problems again the rest
of the refactoring transformations work is done for you.
And you can apply those changes.
Okay so the last set of transformations I will be showing
you today has to do with Objective-C 2.0.
And as Robert said there is two things we can help you
with to convert you towards Objective-C 2.0.
We can help modernize your groups and we can help
convert your instance variables to properties.
So for the first one as you can see here very simple loop.
But even for this very simple loop there
are some working instance variables
that there's some working local variables,
the indexing variable i, the cut variable
ct, the working variable strItem, that kind
of make this thing a little harder to read.
So after you've converted this to
the new syntax it's much shorter,
it's much more easily understood
and it's also actually much faster.
If you want more details about Objective-C 2.0
functionality I would encourage you to go
to the Using Advanced Objective-C 2.0
Features sessions in this very room at 5 o'clock.
The second thing that refactoring does for you is it
adds property declarations and definitions to your classes
that match the existing instance variables of that class.
So as you can see here we have a myString
instance variable and what refactoring will do
for you is add a myString property
declaration to that class.
So let's have a look at how this works.
Switch back to the demo machine.
So while there is a modernized loop transformation
that acts on your selection which you can try yourself,
what we're going to do here, is do something a little
more grand and we're going to use the project wide convert
to Objective-C 2.0 transformation.
This transformation is available from the edit menu just
as the refactor menu item is so we'll select
that right now that brings up the refactoring window with
two checkboxes for the two options that we've talked about,
we're going to check both of those
and click the preview button.
Now because this is project wide instead of just
working on a certain sub selection of files it's going
to take a little longer, that's the first thing,
the other thing is it doesn't work on a selection
so as you see we didn't have any selection set up there.
That's because again it's for the entire project.
So let's have a look at the first file here and you can see
that here what refactoring has done is it has
added a property declaration and if you'll look
at the second file we've added a property definition.
In this case it's in the form of a synthesized directive.
And if we look at the third file
we have modernized the loop.
And for this particular loop we have eliminated
the need for the counter local variable, okay?
We can go ahead and apply these changes.
Now refactoring can get you part of the way there.
There are still other things you can do yourself
you can switch to the dot notation for the usages
of your properties you can remove unneeded getter
setter methods in your class so there is more work to do
but refactoring can definitely get you
started and point you in the right direction.
We can switch back to the demo
machine, to the slide machine.
So we've shown you what happens when
you refactor individual projects.
But what happens when you want to rename
something that's in more than one project?
And in that case you have to perform some steps
which we call cross-project transformations.
Now Bricksmith the open source project
actually has an example of this.
There are actually two Xcode projects
that come with the Bricksmith project.
One is the Bricksmith project itself and then
there's a second one as well that we'll get to in a minute.
So if you wanted to change the class AMSProgressPanel to
something more generic, progress being a linear thing zero
to whatever and you want to rename it to ActivityPanel
so it's just a user doing something in the middle
of something rather than progressing somewhere.
You can go ahead and do that in the Bricksmith project.
But it turns out that, that particular
class is actually declared and defined
in a second project called AMSProgressBar.
AMSProgressBar builds a framework that
is then used by the Bricksmith application.
But if you were to build things
in this state it wouldn't work.
So what do you do?
It's actually very simple, you go ahead and
rename the class in the second project as well.
Now order turns out to be important here.
What you want to do is you want to start with usages
of a class and then you want to progress on up
to the place where the class is declared and defined.
Why do you need to do this?
You need to do this because refactoring has a
safety feature built in which doesn't allow you
to rename a class to the name of another existing class.
So you can't rename your class NSObject for example.
So if you change the framework first refactoring would
say well you're trying to change this other class
to this name of something which already exists.
So just very simple just go ahead and do
all the usages first and you'll be fine.
So let's go ahead and try this out.
Switch back to the demo machine.
Okay so you can see the two projects here.
So we're going to start with the Bricksmith project, the
usage of the class and we're going to find that class
that we talked about AMSProgressPanel, and
once we find our usage of it if we can go ahead
and select the class name and bring
up the refactoring window.
So we're going to go ahead and
rename it to AMSActivityPanel
and also again rename related files
and you'll see why in a minute.
Okay so if we look at the results here first, we'll get
to that error in a second, if we go to LDrawDocument go
to the file, there we go, LDrawDocument file.
So we've renamed the files in this particular project
because you wanted to rename the import statements.
But if we go on we can also see we're also
changing usages, everything that we need to.
But what's going on with that error at the top.
What's going on is that refactoring attempts to find all
of the files that it can find that it can see and if any
of them seem to be files that need to
be changed, it tries to change them.
But what it finds sometimes is that some of these files
are files that it can't guarantee that it can change.
Files that are system header files for example
or files that belong to another project
for those it tells you know I can't do this.
I'm going to let you know that I
can't complete this transformation.
But in our case we know that we can't complete it.
We know that we have two steps to do so we're
going to go ahead and apply these changes anyway.
Now we go to the second project and do the same thing.
So you see that what Yugi's been doing is he's
been saving some of these files as we go along.
In some cases this actually turns out to be pretty necessary
because the code sense index will only re-index files
and re add that information that it knows about, when
a file is saved not just when a file has been edited,
and so in some cases you may need to save
your files in between transformations
to be sure that everything's updated properly.
So here we're going to go ahead
and do the transformation again.
And here you see the results have no error in them.
That's because as far as this project is concerned it has
everything it needs, the declaration and the definition
of the class are all in files that it controls.
We have a look.
We can see again usages are getting changed, the
file names themselves are getting changed here,
import statements are getting changed, it's all good.
So we can apply these changes and then save the files
so what we then need to do is rebuild both projects,
rebuild the framework first and rebuild the
application project and if the demo gods are with us,
which okay give it another second here,
okay maybe the demo gods aren't with us.
But what you'll find, oh there we go.
Okay. Well definitely in your own projects when you
try this what's going to happen is everything is going
to get built correctly and you'll be
able to run your application again.
Everything will work.
Okay so the demo gods weren't quite with us.
But you trust me that, that works.
So we switch back to the slide machine.
Okay. Now one thing that we have
inadvertently showed you today is
that when you are doing refactoring
transformations sometimes there can be problems.
So what do you do when you do a transformation where
there was a problem or where you know that while I played
around with this I actually don't want to keep it.
And that's where the Xcode features snapshots comes in.
As we saw already snapshots are turned on by the check box
in the refactoring window and that
checkbox is on by default.
So you always have snapshot functionality
unless you uncheck that checkbox yourself.
And what it does for you is it provides a way to go back.
Try to do a kind of global undo.
What happens with these changes that we're making some of
the changes are text files and for those text files at least
in theory you can click undo for each one of them
and undo all of the changes made by refactoring.
But we also make changes to things like
project files or nib files or core data files,
actually core data files have an undo
stack but nib files do not because they're
in interface builder and not in Xcode proper.
For those you can't undo yourself.
So for those you want to use snapshots.
What snapshots do is whenever you make a snapshot it
archives away all of the files in your project for you.
Saves them under its own administration and
so what happens is you get a window like this.
So this particular window has some usages of
snapshots very much like what we did today.
Usually it says before rename, before
extract, before create superclass.
What happens is, is you said for example like we did
with this last one when we renamed AMSProgressPanel
if there was a problem with it you don't have to go ahead
and get rid of all of your changes that you've made.
Go back to say your source control management version.
You can just restore to the snapshot
right before that last change.
So we highly encourage you to do that for your projects.
And so with that, I'm done. I will hand things back off to
Robert Bowdidge who will talk about hints for refactoring.
( Applause )
>> Thanks.
Okay so you've just heard today what refactoring is.
You've seen it in use in Xcode.
What I would like to do in this last section
is talk to you about what you should expect
when you start using refactoring on your own projects.
Now one question you might have
is how long does refactoring take?
And the short answer is that refactoring takes
time proportional to the number of files that need
to be analyzed, a.k.a. parsed or compiled, to figure out the
changes and the number of files that need to be changed.
So here's some times on two machines that were in my office.
When the change and I should also mention this is for a
200,000 line program that's part of Xcode.
So if you do a rename that's only one file
for example, renaming a local variable
on my two machines the time went
between three and eight seconds.
If the change involved analyzing and changing three
files it also took between three and eight seconds.
And the reason why is because most of that time
is spent parsing the system headers that are
in every single source file that you include.
If the change involved 43 files, we
saw times between 10 and 26 seconds.
And if 123 files had to be analyzed and
changed the transformation took
between 25 and 43 seconds.
C
This was for rename and these times were comparable
for all of the individual transformations.
For the whole program transformation to convert to
Objective-C 2.0, it's a little different
because that transformation has to parse every single
file in your project to figure out what to change.
And so the time to do that is more proportional
to the time it would take to compile your project.
And so it's not surprising for
large projects for the convert
to Objective-C 2.0 to
take on the order of minutes.
Now another issue is what will
refactoring change in your source code.
So in Xcode 3.0 the refactoring feature
will change the C and Objective-C files in your project.
It will also do some analysis to figure out whether
changes are necessary in C++ or Objective-C++ files
and will warn you if it thinks
that there's changes needed there.
But it will not currently change
a C++ and Objective-C++ files
Now refactoring does understand about comments in your code.
So if you for example extract a new function the comments
in that new function body will
move along with the new function.
If you move an instance variable
from a subclass to a superclass,
the comment leading that instance variable will also move.
However in Xcode 3.0 if you rename a
declaration Xcode will not go looking through your comments
in your source code looking for
references to that declaration.
So that's a case where you'll have
to fall back on find and replace.
Xcode also understand about macros.
And so if there are changes required in macro parameters
Xcode will be able to do those as part of refactoring.
It currently will not make the changes in macro bodies and
it will warn you saying that this macro uses this variable
that I need to change and you'll need to do that by hand.
And as Andrew explained earlier
if you have a change that goes
across multiple projects you'll need
to make that change in each project.
Now a second issue is what code actually
gets analyzed as part of refactoring?
So for example one of the great things about the C
programming language is you have the preprocessor.
And the preprocessor lets you declare conditional code.
Code that's only compiled in certain situations.
So you can take a block of coding you could say this
code should only be compiled if I'm building for Intel.
This code should only be compiled
if I'm doing a debug build.
This code should only be compiled if I'm building
this particular feature that I want to test.
So the question is what happens with conditional code,
what happens when we're doing the analysis and the rule
for Xcode 3.0 is that whatever code would
compile when you hit the build button is the same code
that would be changed if you did refactoring at that point.
So in this example here, we see that there's a variable
called dailyRate that's used on all three lines.
But the second line is hidden inside
of a #ifdef that says that,
that line is only compiled if the debug macro is set.
So if you went to rename dailyRate that
variable would only be changed on all three lines
if the debug macro is going to be set in the current build.
You can see at the top that our current build setting for
this project is the debug build setting which happens to set
that macro and so all three occurrences would
change if we renamed this at this point.
Another issue with analysis is the question
of what happens when your code's incorrect.
Xcodes refactoring will allow you
to change files that don't compile.
However while it will be able to make changes in those files
it may not get things exactly right near the syntax error
that's causing the compiler.
So whenever possible try to make sure that your
code compiles before you start doing refactoring.
And finally here are some strategies
for the best results with refactoring.
As Andrew pointed out refactoring changes
your source code and as programmers,
our work product is our source code we want to keep it.
It's important to us.
And to keep it correct.
So one of the issues with refactoring is that
refactoring is often an exploratory process.
You'll start doing a few transformations
you'll look at your program
and you'll say gee is this going in the direction I want?
And you might find after several transformations you've
either figured out that the entire task was inappropriate
for some reason, isn't going to work out because of
some detail you'd missed, or is actually incorrect.
And so you'd like to be able to go back in those cases.
And so when you're using refactoring
make sure you have a way to go back.
Either use the snapshot feature that
we built into Xcode for refactoring,
save the files into your source code control system,
save the files on the side, but make sure you have a way
of going back because that's going to be a common practice.
The other thing to remember is that sometimes
it's okay to do incorrect transformations.
So for example let's imagine that you're renaming a
declaration and it's used in 240 places.
And you're able to change 200, or you ask Xcode
to refactor that and it can make the changes in 239
and there's one case where
it can't because of a conflicting name.
There's nothing wrong with hitting the apply button then,
having Xcode make all of the changes
and then fixing that last case by hand.
Similarly there might be cases where you can actually
use the analysis done by refactoring to do clever tricks
that we didn't think of or that aren't really refactoring.
So for example one way that you can actually
change from one API to another is through rename.
For example in Leopard the NSString's CString
method is actually deprecated now.
And so if you, for example, need to change all of the CStrings
to UTF-8 string one way you could do that is simply
to rename the CString method to be UTF-8 string.
You'll get a bunch of errors because refactoring
will say that this isn't a safe transformation,
it's not going to keep the code compiling
it's not going to keep it running,
because first of all it can't actually change the
definition of the method because it's in a system header
and it's write protected, and because
it can't actually find the definition.
But you can still hit apply, get the changes throughout
your program and use some of the analysis of refactoring
to find exactly where that method is actually used.
So what you've learned today is that Xcode
3.0 has support for refactoring.
And specifically it allows you to modify and refactor
your C and Objective-C files in your projects.
You've learned that refactoring is a way to make
global, structural, controlled changes to your program.
And you've learned that refactoring is a great way to
make your code more maintainable, more understandable
or to make it easier to apply future enhancements.
We hope you enjoy using this feature of Xcode
we look forward to hearing your experiences,
seeing the bugs that you find and
please let us know what you think.
With that I'd like to bring Matt
Formica up to close the session.
Thanks.
( Applause )
>> Thank you, I'd like to invite the
Q and A team to come up at this point.
If you have questions after this session
or later in the week or in coming weeks,
feel free to email me, I'm the Developer Tools Evangelist.
I'd love to get your feedback on refactoring
and how we can continue to enhance it.